In technology today, there's the big three: Microsoft, Google, Apple. Today, Apple is perhaps
the most successful company in the world. Google and Microsoft may get less attention and love,
but they're still giant players in search and advertising (Google) and PC operating systems and
software (Microsoft). Last week, the two behemoths released earnings. And the results suggest
that the highly valuable enterprises are showing signs of maturation, and perhaps even age. At
both companies, the core businesses that fueled impressive early growth are falling off. To
compensate, Google is pushing into lower-margin related businesses.

Google's sagging earnings—accidentally released early because of human clerical error on
the part of their filing firm—revealed two worrisome trends for the search-and-advertising giant.
Some 96 percent of Google's revenue comes from selling ads and nearly 70 percent of that
revenue comes from sites Google owns, like its search page. But Google is plowing cash into
hardware like smartphones and tablets. Google CEO Larry Page said in a statement before a call
with analysts that“we took a big bet on Android back in 2005,”and that, today,“over half a billion
Android devices”have been sold, with 1.3 million coming online every day.

This is all true, Android is the most popular smart phone standard in the world. No one
doubts Android's growth or usefulness as a counterweight to Apple in smartphone operating
systems. In the words of the Samsung ads, it's not just“the next big thing”but the big thing. But it's
still not clear exactly how Google will make money from its foray into smartphone operating
systems and handsets. Google's $12.5 billion acquisition of Motorola, the handset maker, last
May, took a big chunk out of the company's quarterly profits. This was the first quarter that the
costs of the Motorola acquisition showed up on Google's earnings. Motorola also helps explain the
most impressive number Google could report, a 45 percent growth in revenues over the year.
Google's third-quarter revenue jumped from $9.7 billion to $14.1 billion, but $2.58 billion of that
came from Motorola—more than half.

Google's core Web- and- search business, despite falling off in profitability, still reported
strong results. Revenues from websites Google owns came in at $7.73 billion, about two thirds of
Google's total revenue. Less payments to sites in Google's network for driving traffic to Google's
ads, revenues came in at $11.33 billion, a 15 percent jump from third quarter of 2011. That's not
bad. But it turns out that Google is having to spend more to get traffic. Cost-per-click, the revenue
generated by an advertiser every time a user clicks on an ad placed by Google, decreased 15
percent since this time last year.

Which helps explain the foray into hardware. Larry Page, Google's CEO, spent a good chunk
of his remarks before the earnings call hyping Google's new hardware: the Nexus 7 and the
Chromebook, the ultrathin laptop manufactured by Samsung that bears a certain resemblance to
another company's offerings (it's also much, much cheaper).

But here's the problem: hardware is a low-margin, tough industry for everyone besides Apple.
IBM, America's original high-tech innovative-growth company, got out of the PC business in
2005, while HP and Dell are struggling. And with the PC market coming under pressure from
Apple and smartbooks, Microsoft—the original hypergrowth company—is under pressure and
trying to find something else that works. Ironically, Microsoft has been aiming at one of the
markets that Google dominates.

As Google and Microsoft slug it out in hardware, online advertising, and search in future,
Apple sits in its walled garden, looking on with a mix of indifference and glee.